---
date: 2019-10-6
tags:
  - Muamalat
  - Mufti Niaz Hannan
  - Hanafi
  - Fiqh
  - Interactions
  - Drinks
  - Animals
  - Marriage
  - Divorce
author: Modasser Billah
location: Comilla, Bangladesh
title: Fiqh of Interactions(Hanafi)::Class-3
description: "Discussions on marriage and divorce and review from previous class on animals and drinks"
readingTime: 4
# you can add a custom image to the public directory then just put the url here for example /images/....
image: "https://source.unsplash.com//BKZzaP7jc0Y/800x400"
---
<h3 style="text-align: center;"> &#xFDFD;</h3>



## Review
- _Istihalah_ : transforming something into a halaal form.
- Gelatine or renet(?) from anything other than pig is permissible.
- Gelatine type A is made of pig skin.
- Kombucha tea:
	- is fermented
	- has alcohol in it, but < 0.5% ( the commercial one)
	- home brewed kombucha has higher percentage of alcohol
	- it is not originally khamr_
	- it is better to avoid it
	- it can be categorised as _makruh_ but not haraam.
- CBD and THC both come from cannabis. CBD is used as a painkiller and does not have the same effects as THC or marijuana. It is deemed permissible.
- Oysters are not fish, so oyster sauce is not permissible.
- The alcoholic substance in vanilla extract is intoxicating. So, it should be avoided.
- Sheesha is not permissible primarily because of the physical harm it causes.
- Use the word _haraam_ with caution. It is generally used for things that are clearly stated so in Quran and/or Sunnah. For other things that are derived from general principles as not permissible and follow the same ruling as _haraam_, say these are not permissible instead of haraam.
- Alcohol content in perfume is very minimal. Just to exercise caution, don’t spray it onto the skin.

## Nikah (Marriage)

### Basics

- Nikah is contracted with an offer and an acceptance.
- The offer consists of:
	- _Mut’ah_
	- _Bud’ah_
	- these basically mean the right to consummate the marriage
- The man asks for these and offers mahr in exchange.
- In matters of transactions, the language has to be in past tense.
- In case of marriage, it can also be future tense for the offer and past tense for the acceptance.
- 2 male or 1 male and 2 female witnesses are mandatory. They should be:
	- Sane
	- Adult
	- Free
	- any other criteria is not important

### Mahram ( People prohibited to be married to)
#### Principles
- Usul - Roots/Origins: any of the mothers going upwards
- Furu - Branches/Descendents: any of the daughters going downwards

#### Examples
- A man can not marry his mother-in-law (and upwards) whether he consummated the marriage or not. Same goes for daughters from previous marriages (and downwards) except that it applies after consummation of the marriage.
- A man can not marry his step mother (and upwards) and wives of  sons (and downwards).
- A man can not marry his foster mother or foster sister.
- What if a grown person drinks breast milk?
	- That does not mean anything.
	- The rules of fostering only applies until 2 and a half years.
- For establishing foster relationships, one sip within first 30 months is enough.
- A man can not be married to two biological sisters simultaneously.
- He will have to divorce one first, wait out the iddah and then marry the other.
- A man can not be married to a woman and her aunt or niece at the same time.
- In case of zina, the usul and furu of the woman becomes mahram for the man in hanafi school.

### Divorce (Talaq)
- Two types:
	- Raj’i (Revocable)
	- Bain ( Irrevocable without re-marriage)
		- Nikah breaks immediately in this case.
		- They need to marry again to stay together.
		- The husband must provide sustenance through the iddah.
- _Khalwah Sahihah_: A man has to pay full mahr if they had enough time and opportunity to consummate the marriage.
